---
published: true
title: "The first week of rstat.us: Users, Press, Scaling, oh my!"
layout: post
---

Hey everyone. A lot of people have been asking me about [rstat.us][1] lately,
so I figured I'd tell a little bit of the story as it's gone down so far.

## Stats

First, here's some numbers:

* Users: 4553
* Uniques: 25,000
* Pageviews: 119,385
* Pages/visit: 4.77
* Statuses posted: 9387

Here's some fun info: stats on statuses by language:

* german 118
* russian 1355
* none 97 <- ha!
* english 4836
* spanish 1412
* dutch 98
* french 1155
* portuguese 272
* farsi 66
* pinyin 1

Code:

Lines, by committer:

* 28 AndrewVos
* 124 BRIMIL01
* 6 Blaine Cook
* 107 Brendan Taylor
* 924 Brian Miller
* 45 Caley Woods
* 162 Carol Nichols
* 20 Claudio Perez Gamayo
* 1347 Dominic Dagradi
* 4 James Larkby-Lahet
* 99 Jorge H. Cuadrado
* 258 Kat Hagan
* 10 Lauren Voswinkel
* 143 LindseyB
* 16 MenTaLguY
* 3 Michael Stevens
* 3 Murilo Santana
* 10 Nate Good
* 1 Peter Aronoff
* 24 Shebanian
* 44 Stephen Paul Weber
* 1409 Steve Klabnik
* 8 Tony Arcieri
* 478 Zachary Scott
* 104 burningTyger
* 28 james cook
* 56 kat
* 200 wilkie
* 10 wolfwood

Also, wilkie has a lot more code in the 3 gems that we build off of, for our
ostatus implementation.

That makes for 29 unique committers. These stats were generated by git-blame.

Just over 200 pull requests

872 commits

The deal with Heroku

Crazy! Such good stuff. I'm really excited as to how it's going, but there
were a few rocky points along the way as well. Some people saw me tweeting in
frustration with Heroku, so here's the skinny:

On Sunday, for some reason, our 3 line app.js file, as well as our
favicon.ico, started to take 60 seconds to respond. This meant that a dyno was
getting tied up, and since Heroku changed the way their mesh works, they kept
routing requests to these screwed up dynos. This caused a rash of 500 errors,
and I frantically filed a support ticket. This was the first time I'd had a
paid app on Heroku, and they've always been fantastic. The Hackety Hack site
was on the free account, and performed beautifully, with similar traffic.

What it boils down to is this, though: Heroku took about 22 hours to respond
to my support ticket, in any way. Not like "we're looking at it, but it's
Sunday, so it'll take a while." Crickets. Meanwhile, the errors kept
happening. Eventually, I heard something from them, where they pretty much
said 'I see other errors, try fixing those.' with no response on the actual
root cause. I got an email from a Level2 person who promised to investigate
and escalate, but by now, I still haven't heard.

I also had a smaller issue with MongoHQ. To their credit, I heard back Sunday
night, and the issue with them was an annoyance, not a showstopper. I ended up
hearing from the CEO, who ended up following up with me multiple times, and in
a pretty timely fashion.

So, we moved our hosting away from Heroku and onto Duostack. Now, full
disclosure: I'm friends with the guys from DuoStack. That said, they took care
of me. I found a small bug in their platform when deploying the app, but
everything's gone really well. Bunches of users have commented on how fast the
site is now, and I've been really happy with it so far. We'll see how it goes.

The Future

Anyway, here's what's next for [rstat.us][1]: The biggest thing is getting to
100% ostatus compliance. We spent lots of time this week getting screwed over
by a bug in Google's hub implementation, but now that it's all taken care of
now. While we work on that, we're also getting ready to deploy a statusnet
compliant API, so people can use statusnet clients on mobile and desktop. This
is huge for me, as I'm really missing notifications.

Other than that, just keep using it! Tell your friends! If you code, come join
us on the IRC (#rstatus on freenode), and help file bugs and patch them!

   [1]: http://rstat.us

