---
layout: post
title: "Burnout"
date: 2011-11-17 09:57
comments: true
categories:
---

I have a confession to make: Other than one little stint at RubyC, I
haven't really written code in almost a month. And I haven't really written a
'real' blog post in almost six weeks.

It happens. I was hitting it really hard there for a while, and the
combination of stresses from travel, speaking, writing, conference parties, and
everything else was really getting to me. I don't think that I was burned out
_yet_, but I decided to explicitly take the last two weeks off from doing
almost anything to prevent myself from getting to that point.

This doesn't mean that I'm going to _stop_ doing any of these things. I'd be
lying if I tried to say that I'd be reintroducing long-term balance into my
life. That balance never really existed. I've always been one to throw
myself at things 100%. Balance is something I don't do particularly well.

One thing I am going to be working on, though, is this: Hackety and Shoes
stress me out. Like a lot. This causes me to avoid working on them, which
makes them not improve so quickly, which makes me stress about it worse. I'm
not really sure how to fix that one... but at some point, I'm going to have to
confront that.

Anyway, hopefully I'll be back at it soon. Those of you waiting on some of my
projects, my bad. Things will still be slow for a bit. I'm going to D.C. this
weekend to teach kids with Hackety and Lego Mindstorms, so maybe that'll get
me out of this funk. Or maybe it'll delay it another couple of days.

But I'll be around again soon.
