---
title: "Anti-capitalism 101"
date: 2012-03-31 15:38
---

People are often surprised to find out that I identify as an anti-capitalist.
At least in America, many people see capitalism as inevitable, or even as the
way things always were. Unfortunately, there's so much rhetoric and confusion
around this topic that it always takes a long time to break it down. I'd been
meaning to write something about this topic, but then I found this really great
work called [Capitalism, Class, and Class Struggle for (ex)
Dummies](http://libcom.org/files/Capitalism_ex-dummies_web.pdf). I've adapted
it with my own thoughts and edits below. It in turn is adapted from [this
essay](http://libcom.org/library/capitalism-introduction) and [this
essay](http://libcom.org/library/class-class-struggle-introduction) from
LibCom.org, so if you'd like to see the history, you can read those versions as
well.

I plan on refining this as things go along, as it's still a bit jargony in
places. Any suggestions are very welcome!

<hr />

## Capitalism: an introduction

At its root, capitalism is an economic system based on three things: wage
labour (working for a wage), private ownership of the means of production
(things like factories, machinery, farms, and offices), and production for
exchange and profit.

While some people own means of production, or capital, most of us don't and so
to survive we need to sell our ability to work in return for a wage, or else
scrape by on benefits. This first group of people is the capitalist class or
"bourgeoisie" in Marxist jargon, and the second group is the working class or
"proletariat". This jargon is only included so that you can make connections to
other literature, we'll stick away from such things later in this text.

Capitalism is based on a simple process—money is invested to generate more
money. When money functions like this, it functions as capital. For instance,
when a company uses its profits to hire more staff or open new premises, and so
make more profit, the money here is functioning as capital. As capital
increases (or the economy expands), this is called 'capital accumulation', and
it's the driving force of the economy.

Those accumulating capital do so better when they can shift costs onto others.
If companies can cut costs by not protecting the environment, or by paying
sweatshop wages, they will. So catastrophic climate change and widespread
poverty are signs of the normal functioning of the system. Furthermore, for
money to make more money, more and more things have to be exchangeable for
money. Thus the tendency is for everything from everyday items to DNA sequences
to carbon dioxide emissions—and, crucially, our ability to work—to become
commodified.

And it is this last point—the commodification of our creative and productive
capacities, our ability to work—which holds the secret to capital accumulation.
Money does not turn into more money by magic, but by the work we do every day.

In a world where everything is for sale, we all need something to sell in order
to buy the things we need. Those of us with nothing to sell except our ability
to work have to sell this ability to those who own the factories, offices, etc.
And of course, the things we produce at work aren't ours, they belong to our
bosses.

Furthermore, because of long hours, productivity improvements etc, we produce
much more than necessary to keep us going as workers. The wages we get roughly
match the cost of the products necessary to keep us alive and able to work each
day (which is why, at the end of each month, our bank balance rarely looks that
different to the month before). The difference between the wages we are paid
and the value we create is how capital is accumulated, or profit is made.

This difference between the wages we are paid and the value we create is called
"surplus value". The extraction of surplus value by employers is the reason we
view capitalism as a system based on exploitation—the exploitation of the
working class. This process is essentially the same for all wage labour, not
just that in private companies. Public sector workers also face constant
attacks on their wages and conditions in order to reduce costs and maximise
profits across the economy as a whole.

### Unwaged labour

The accumulation of capital also relies on unwaged work, such as housework or
domestic labour. This includes the reproduction of labour power in the form of
producing and raising children—the next generation of workers—and servicing the
current workforce—physically, emotionally, and sexually. This unpaid labour is
predominantely carried out by women.

Servicing men and children at home serves capital: by making housework and
reproduction a women’s ‘natural and feminine’ process rather than work,
capitalism benefits in the form of free labour. When capital pays husbands they
get two workers, not one. Denying domestic labour a wage makes this work
invisible, and divides the working class into waged and unwaged at the expense
of both.

### Competition

In order to accumulate capital, our boss must compete in the market with bosses
ofother companies. They cannot afford to ignore market forces, or they will
lose ground to their rivals, lose money, go bust, get taken over, and
ultimately cease to be our boss. Therefore even the bosses aren't really in
control of capitalism, capital itself is. It's because of this that we can talk
about capital as if it has agency or interests of its own, and so often talking
about 'capital' is more precise than talking about bosses.

Both bosses and workers, therefore, are alienated by this process, but in
different ways. While from the workers' perspective, our alienation is
experienced through being controlled by our boss, the boss experiences it
through impersonal market forces and competition with other bosses.

Because of this, bosses and politicians are powerless in the face of ‘market
forces,’ each needing to act in a way conducive to continued accumulation (and
in any case they do quite well out of it!). They cannot act in our interests,
since any concessions they grant us will help their competitors on a national
or international level.

So, for example, if a manufacturer develops new technology for making cars
which doubles productivity it can lay off half its workers, increase its
profits and reduce the price of its cars in order to undercut its competition.
If another company wants to be nice to its employees and not sack people,
eventually it will be driven out of business or taken over by its more ruthless
competitor—so it will also have to bring in the new machinery and make the
layoffs to stay competitive.

Of course, if businesses were given a completely free hand to do as they
please, monopolies would soon develop and stifle competition which would lead
to the system grinding to a halt. The state intervenes, therefore to act on
behalf of the long-term interests of capital as a whole. We observed this
happen in America back in the Robber Baron days.

### The State

The primary function of the state in capitalist society is to maintain the
capitalist system and aid the accumulation of capital. As such, the state uses
repressive laws and violence against the working class when we try to further
our interests against capital. For example, bringing in anti-strike laws, or
sending in police or soldiers to break up strikes and demonstrations.

The "ideal" type of state under capitalism at the present time is liberal
democratic, however in order to continue capital accumulation at times
different political systems are used by capital to do this. State capitalism in
the USSR, and fascism in Italy and Germany are two such models, which were
necessary for the authorities at the time in order to co-opt and crush powerful
working-class movements which threatened the very continuation of capitalism.

When the excesses of bosses cause workers to fight back, alongside repression
the state occasionally intervenes to make sure business as usual resumes
without disruption. For this reason national and international laws protecting
workers' rights and the environment exist. Generally the strength and
enforcement of these laws ebbs and flows in relation to the balance of power
between employers and employees in any given time and place. For example, in
France where workers are more well-organised and militant, there is a maximum
working week of 35 hours. In the UK, where workers are less militant the
maximum is 48 hours, and in the US where workers are even less likely to strike
there is no maximum at all.

### History

Capitalism is presented as a 'natural' system, formed a bit like mountains or
land masses by forces beyond human control, that it is an economic system
ultimately resulting from human nature. However it was not established by
'natural forces' but by intense and massive violence across the globe. First in
the 'advanced' countries, enclosures drove self-sufficient peasants from
communal land into the cities to work in factories. Any resistance was crushed.
People who resisted the imposition of wage labour were subjected to vagabond
laws and imprisonment, torture, deportation or execution. In England under the
reign of Henry VIII alone 72,000 people were executed for vagabondage.

Later capitalism was spread by invasion and conquest by Western imperialist
powers around the globe. Whole civilisations were brutally destroyed with
communities driven from their land into waged work. The only countries that
avoided conquest were those—like Japan—which adopted capitalism on their own
in order to compete with the other imperial powers.  Everywhere capitalism
developed, peasants and early workers resisted, but were eventually overcome by
mass terror and violence.

Capitalism did not arise by a set of natural laws which stem from human nature:
it was spread by the organised violence of the elite. The concept of private
property of land and means of production might seem now like the natural state
of things, however we should remember it is a man-made concept enforced by
conquest. Similarly, the existence of a class of people with nothing to sell
but their labour power is not something which has always been the case—common
land shared by all was seized by force, and the dispossessed forced to work for
a wage under the threat of starvation or even execution. As capital expanded,
it created a global working class consisting of the majority of the world's
population whom it exploits but also depends on.

### The Future

Capitalism has only existed as the dominant economic system on the planet for a
little over 200 years. Compared to the half a million years of human existence
it is a momentary blip, and therefore it would be naive to assume that it will
last for ever. It is entirely reliant on us, the working class, and our labour
which it must exploit, and so it will only survive as long as we let it.

## Class & Class Struggle: an introduction

The first thing to say is that there are various ways of referring to class.
Often, when people talk about class, they talk in terms of
cultural/sociological labels. For example, middleclass people like foreign
films, working class people like football, upper-class people like top hats and
so on.

Another way to talk about class, however, is based on classes' economic
positions. We talk about class like this because we see it as essential for
understanding how capitalist society works, and consequently how we can change
it.

It is important to stress that our definition of class is not for classifying
individuals or putting them in boxes, but in order to understand the forces
which shape our world, why our bosses and politicians act the way they do, and
how we can act to improve our conditions.

### Class and Capitalism

The economic system which dominates the world at present is called capitalism.
As mentioned earlier, capitalism is essentially a system based on the
self-expansion of capital—commodities and money making more commodities and
more money.

This doesn’t happen by magic, but by human labour. For the work we do, we're
paid for only a fraction of what we produce. The difference between the value
we produce and the amount we're paid in wages is the "surplus value" we've
produced. This is kept by our boss as profit and either reinvested to make more
money or used to buy swimming pools or fur coats or whatever.

In order for this to take place, a class of people must be created who don't
own anything they can use to make money i.e. offices, factories, farmland or
other means of production.  This class must then sell their ability to work in
order to purchase essential goods and services in order to survive. This class
is the working class.

So at one end of the spectrum is this class, with nothing to sell but their
ability to work. At the other, those who do own capital to hire workers to
expand their capital. Individuals in society will fall at some point between
these two poles, but what is important from a political point of view is not
the positions of individuals but the social relationship between classes.

### The Working Class

The working class then, or 'proletariat' as it is sometimes called, the class
who is forced to work for wages, or claim benefits if we cannot find work or
are too sick or elderly to work, to survive. We sell our time and energy to a
boss for their benefit.

Our work is the basis of this society. And it is the fact that this society
relies on the work we do, while at the same time always squeezing us to maximise
profit, that makes it vulnerable.

### Class Struggle

When we are at work, our time and activity is not our own. We have to obey the
alarm clock, the time card, the managers, the deadlines and the targets.

Work takes up the majority of our lives. We may see our managers more than we
see our friends and partners. Even if we enjoy parts of our job we experience
it as something alien to us, over which we have very little control. This is
true whether we're talking about the nuts and bolts of the actual work itself
or the amount of hours, breaks, time off etc.

Work being forced on us like this compels us to resist.

Employers and bosses want to get the maximum amount of work from us, from the
longest hours, for the least pay. We, on the other hand, want to be able to
enjoy our lives: we don't want to be over-worked, and we want shorter hours and
more pay.

This antagonism is central to capitalism. Between these two sides is a push and
pull: employers cut pay, increase hours, speed up the pace of work. But we
attempt to resist: either covertly and individually by taking it easy, grabbing
moments to take a break and chat to colleagues, calling in sick, leaving early.
Or we can resist overtly and collectively with strikes, slow-downs, occupations
etc.

This is class struggle. The conflict between those of us who have to work for a
wage and our employers and governments, who are the capitalist class, or
'bourgeoisie'.  By resisting the imposition of work, we say that our lives are
more important than our boss's profits. This attacks the very nature of
capitalism, where profit is the most important reason for doing anything, and
points to the possibility of a world without classes and privately owned means
of production. We are the working class resisting our own existence. We are the
working class struggling against work and class.

### Beyond the Workplace

Class struggle does not only take place in the workplace. Class conflict
reveals itself in many aspects of life.  For example, affordable housing is
something that concerns all working class people.  However, affordable for us
means unprofitable for them. In a capitalist economy, it often makes more sense
to build luxury apartment blocks, even while tens of thousands are homeless,
than to build housing which we can afford to live in. So struggles to defend
social housing, or occupying empty properties to live in are part of the class
struggle.

Similarly, healthcare provision can be a site of class conflict. Governments or
companies attempt to reduce spending on healthcare by cutting budgets and
introducing charges for services to shift the burden of costs onto the working
class, whereas we want the best healthcare possible for as little cost as
possible.

### The ‘Middle Class’

While the economic interests of capitalists are directly opposed to those of
workers, a minority of the working class will be better off than others, or
have some level of power over others. When talking about history and social
change it can be useful to refer to this part of the proletariat as a "middle
class", despite the fact that it is not a distinct economic class, in order to
understand the behaviour of different groups.

Class struggle can sometimes be derailed by allowing the creation or expansion
of the middle class—Margaret Thatcher encouraged home ownership by cheaply
selling off social housing in the UK during the big struggles of the 1980s,
knowing that workers are less likely to strike if they have a mortgage, and
allowing some workers to become better off on individual levels, rather than as
a collective. And in South Africa the creation of a black middle class helped
derail workers' struggles when apartheid was overturned, by allowing limited
social mobility and giving some black workers a stake in the system.

Bosses try to find all sorts of ways to materially and psychologically divide
the working class, including by salary differentials, professional status, race
and by gender.  It should be pointed out again that we use these class
definitions in order to understand social forces at work, and not to label
individuals or determine how individuals will act in given situations.

### Conclusion

Talking about class in a political sense is not about which accent you have but
the basic conflict which defines capitalism—those of us who must work for a
living vs. those who profit from the work that we do. By fighting for our own
interests and needs against the dictates of capital and the market we lay the
basis for a new type of society—a society without money, class, or capitalism,
organised for the direct fulfilment of our needs: a Libertarian Communist
society.
