---
title: "Birthday Cards for Dad"
date: 2012-03-26 10:41
---

Hey everyone. If you follow me on Twitter, you'll know that I've been a bit
absent lately. Basically, my dad has
[angiosarcoma](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angiosarcoma). It's a really rare
cancer of the blood vessels. A city the size of Pittsburgh sees two cases every
ten years, roughly. It's certainly terminal, while he had some chemotherapy a
few days ago, we won't know if it's helped at all for another week or so, and
if it works, it'll give him another few weeks to months at best. It came on
really fast: he felt some shortness of breath the first week of February, went
into the hospital in week three, by week four he almost died from a blood
vessel bursting due to weakness from the disease.

Anyway, you all have sent me tons of well-wishes and such over the last week,
and it's truly appreciated. It's nice to know that I have support, as I try to
support my family. I'm the oldest son, so that carries a lot of
responsibilities, and you guys have helped me a lot.

However, if I can ask you for one more thing...

My dad turns 54 on Sunday. My aunt told my mom that for his birthday, she's
going to email everyone she knows, ask them to send him a birthday card, and
she's hoping to get 100. I think that's a pretty awesome idea, but I also
happen to know that while I've mentioned to my dad that 'people on the internet
I know send well-wishes,' I think it'd be super awesome to blow my aunt out of
the water and give my dad a zillion cards for his last birthday.

So yeah, if you have a few minutes this week, and you're thinking of my father,
send a birthday card to my house. Here's the address:

*note*: Five years later, I've removed the address. I haven't lived there in
years, please don't see this now and send mail to some random person kthx.

Oh yeah: My dad is also Steve. I'm not a junior because he has no middle name:
his mother said they were too poor to give him one.

Additionally, I mean April 1. That's his birthday. However, if you live far
away and it'll be a bit late, that's perfectly fine, still send one. I think
that 'oh, this card came from so far away that it took some time' is pretty
awesome in its own way.

I really think this would be an awesome last gift to my dad. One of the worst
things about being in the hospital is that you feel cut off from everything
outside of that room, and while I've spent almost every minute of the last 8
days in there with him, keeping your spirits up helps the healing process quite
a bit.

Thanks. <3 <3 <3
